TODO make this conditional when we support more content types
This tag enables pages to be featured in Google Discover as large previews
See: https://developers.google.com/search/docs/advanced/mobile/google-discover?hl=en&visit_id=637424198370039526-3805703503&rd=1
The following script does not vary between modern & legacy browsers
The following script does not vary between modern & legacy browsers
Skip to main content Skip to navigation Advertisement US edition US edition UK edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian: news website of the year Search jobs  Sign in Search News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show More Show More News US news World news Environment Soccer US politics Business Tech Science Newsletters Fight to vote Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Letters Opinion videos Cartoons Sport Soccer NFL Tennis MLB MLS NBA NHL F1 Culture Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Home & garden Health & fitness Family Travel Money Search Search Make a contribution Subscribe Search jobs Digital Archive Guardian Puzzles app Guardian content licensing site The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Corrections Facebook Twitter Search jobs Digital Archive Guardian Puzzles app Guardian content licensing site Environment Climate crisis Wildlife Energy Pollution Green light Wildlife     This article is more than  10 years old Tiny frog claimed as world's smallest vertebrate This article is more than 10 years old Researchers have discovered in Papua New Guinea what they claim is the  world's smallest frog   The tiny frog called  Paedophryne amanuensis  measures around 7mm.
Photograph: Christopher Austin/LSU/AFP/Getty Images The tiny frog called  Paedophryne amanuensis  measures around 7mm.
Photograph: Christopher Austin/LSU/AFP/Getty Images Associated Press Thu 12 Jan 2012 06.33 EST Researchers have discovered in  Papua New Guinea  what they claim is the world's smallest frog.
An article Wednesday in the journal PLoS One  named  Paedophryne amauensis  as the world's smallest animal with a spine.
The adult frogs are about three-tenths of an inch long, and a millimetre or so smaller than a carp found on the Indonesian island of Sumatra.
The frogs are so small that Louisiana State University herpetologist and environmental biologist Christopher Austin had to enlarge close-up photos to describe them.
Austin discovered the tiny frogs – along with another small frog species – in August 2009 while on a trip to Papua New Guinea to study the extreme diversity of the island's wildlife.
Steven J. Beaupre, a University of Arkansas scientist and president-elect of the American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists, said many vertebrates have males and females of very different sizes, "so it is reasonable that the world's smallest vertebrate may end up being either the males or the females of some specific fish or amphibian species."
He said he doesn't pay attention to "tiniest" reports, but the frogs themselves are a significant discovery.
"The discovery of two new frog species comes as great news against the background of more prevalent accounts of tropical amphibian extinction," he wrote in an email.
Knowing about such tiny creatures and their ecology, he said, helps scientists "better understand the advantages and disadvantages of extreme small size and how such extremes evolve.
Fundamentally, these tiny vertebrates provide a window on the principles that constrain animal design."
Austin said that since these frogs hatch out as hoppers rather than tadpoles and live on the ground, their existence contradicts the hypothesis that evolution at large and small extremes is linked to life in water.
At least 29 species of minuscule frogs in equatorial regions worldwide live in leaf litter or moss that is moist year-round and eat even tinier invertebrates, creating a previously unknown "ecological guild" of similar animals with similar life habits, he said.
"We realised these frogs were probably doing something incredibly different from what normal frogs do – invading this open niche of wet leaf litter that is full of really tiny insects that other frogs and possibly other creatures weren't eating," Austin said.
In August 2009, Austin and graduate student Eric Rittmeyer were collecting and recording the mating calls of frogs at night in a tropical forest near the village of Amau in eastern Papua New Guinea, when they heard a chorus of high-pitched "tinks."
"This frog has a call that doesn't sound like a frog at all.
It sounds like an insect," he said.Austin estimated that they found 20 previously unknown species in New Guinea, which is such a hotspot of diversity that scientists figure they've described only about six-tenths of all the species living there.
Get the Guardian's environment news on your iPhone with  our new app .
You can also join us on  Twitter ,  Facebook  and  Google+ Topics Wildlife Papua New Guinea Asia Pacific Taxonomy Biology Zoology news Reuse this content Most viewed Most viewed Environment Climate crisis Wildlife Energy Pollution Green light News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Contact us Complaints & corrections SecureDrop Work for us Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Help All topics All writers Digital newspaper archive Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Twitter Newsletters Advertise with us Guardian Labs Search jobs Back to top ©    2022    Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies.
All rights reserved.
(modern)
no recipe markup
