Top Title Header
Begin Top Overall Navigation
CONTENTS
Main Page Dynamic Development
The Foundations of Developmental
Biology
Gametogenesis
From Sperm and Egg to Embryo
Genetic Regulation of Development
Organizing the Multicellular
Embryo
Generating Cell Diversity
Dynamic Development at a
Glance
Learning Resources
Research Resources
The Developmental Biology Journal
Club
Developmental Biology Tutorial
Xenopus  as a Model System in Developmental Biology
Amphibian embryos were used in the very first embryological experiments,
when Wilhelm Roux conducted his "hot needle" experiment in an
attempt to prove his concept of qualitative division.
Amphibian embryos
remained the embryos of choice for experimental embryologists for many decades.
European embryologists used predominantly urodele embryos (such as  Triturus )
and embryos of the frog  Rana temporaria , which is related to the
North American species  Rana pipiens .
Amphibian embryos are large,
can be obtained in large numbers and can be maintained easily and inexpensively
in the laboratory.
They are relatively easy to manipulate with microsurgical
instruments, and they heal readily after surgery.
In the early days, those
instruments were made by hand.
Studies on embryos were complemented by studies
on oocytes, which are readily accessible by simple surgery on females.
One disadvantage of traditional amphibian species is that they are seasonal
breeders.
This meant that investigators could not do their experiments throughout
the year.
Xenopus laevis , the South African Clawed Frog, is a notable
exception.
In fact, it was its ability to spawn when induced with an injection
of gonadotropic hormone that led to its common usage for human pregnancy
tests in the 1950s: An injection of pregnancy urine (which contains chorionic
gonadotropin) would induce spawning.
This led investigators to consider
its use in experimental embryology.
In fact, it was commonly used for experimental
embryology in South Africa before its utility was recognized elsewhere.
B.I.
Balinsky was one of the South African embryologists who used  Xenopus .
During the 1950s, Fischberg's laboratory in Geneva used  Xenopus
for studying development.
His student, John Gurdon, brought attention to
Xenopus  by demonstrating that transplantation of tadpole intestinal
epithelial nuclei into enucleated eggs could promote development to the
adult, thus extending Briggs and King's earlier nuclear transplantation
research that utilized  Rana pipiens .
Shortly thereafter, Don Brown,
Igor Dawid and Ron Reeder in the United States began to use  Xenopus
for biochemical research.
In fact, Brown was the first to isolate a eukaryotic
gene: the  Xenopus  ribosomal RNA genes from oocytes.
Gradually, the
ease of obtaining eggs on a year-round basis, the rapid rate of development
and the availability of mutants such as the anucleolate and albino mutant
caused investigators began to forsake their favorite frogs and newts for
the homely  Xenopus .
Another impetus for investigators to adopt  Xenopus  came in 1971,
when Gurdon and his colleagues demonstrated that the  Xenopus  oocyte
will translate messenger RNA injected into it (Gurdon  et al ., 1971).
This has proven to be a valuable system for the expression of RNA.
Later,
when recombinant DNA technology made it possible to clone individual  Xenopus
genes, injections of synthetic RNA into zygotes allowed investigators to
overexpress RNA or to express antisense RNA to evaluate the role of a transcript
during development.
Meanwhile, in the Netherlands in the late 1960s and early 1970s, P.D.
Nieuwkoop was investigating inductive interactions during early development
of urodeles and, later,  Xenopus .
Using his ingenious animal cap assay,
he demonstrated that the mesoderm is induced by cells of the vegetal hemisphere.
This assay has proven to be a valuable weapon in developmental biologists'
armory.
The animal cap of the blastula will respond to the appropriate signals
to produce a variety of tissues.
This assay has enabled investigators to
hone in on the most intractable problem in developmental biology: embryonic
induction.
We now know that growth factors in the TGF-ß and FGF families
provide the signals for embryonic induction.
Clearly,  Xenopus  has a number of advantages that have enabled
investigators to use it to study many aspects of development.
However, one
of the disadvantages has been the lack of a dependable technique for making
transgenic embryos.
You can clone its genes, and you can inject RNA into
zygotes.
However, RNA is relatively short-lived.
Therefore, the study of
molecular events after the mid-blastula transition remained problematic.
Attempts to inject genes to be expressed in the embryo were frustrated by
the fact that they do not integrate into the frog chromosomes during cleavage
and are then unequally distributed in embryonic cells and, therefore, are
always expressed mosaically.
This remained the case until 1996, when Kroll
and Amaya developed a technique for making stable, non-mosaic transgenic
Xenopus  embryos.
This technique has the potential to boost the utility
of  Xenopus  tremendously.
One big advantage over transgenesis in mice
is that one can make first generation transgenics; you don't need to wait
until the next generation to examine the effects of the exogenous gene on
development.
The transgenesis technique has several steps, and each step is fraught
with problems.
However, when it works, it is very powerful.
Because exogenous
genes are not incorporated into the zygotic genome, Kroll and Amaya decided
to attempt to introduce them into sperm nuclei.
Sperm nuclei are treated
with lysolecithin to demembranate them before incubation with linearized
plasmid containing the exogenous gene to be incorporated into them, along
with restriction enzyme to create nicks in the sperm nuclear DNA.
The nicks
facilitate incorporation of the plasmid DNA.
The nuclei are then placed
in an interphase egg extract, which causes the nuclei to swell as if they
were male pronuclei.
The swollen nuclei are then injected into unfertilized eggs.
The suspension
of nuclei is diluted to optimize the probability that a single nucleus is
injected.
The injection process mimics sperm entry, activating development.
In response, the egg nucleus completes the second meiotic division and forms
a pronucleus, which fuses with the transplanted nucleus.
If a single sperm
nucleus is transplanted, a single pair of centrioles facilitates normal
cleavage.
However, if multiple nuclei are transplanted, supernumerary centrioles
would be present, resulting in abnormal cleavage.
This would be comparable
to the effects of dispermy on sea urchin development that  Boveri
observed.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the transgenesis procedure, Kroll
and Amaya made transgenic embryos from sperm nuclei into which they had
introduced introduced reporter genes.
The results are shown in Figures 1
and 2.
Figure 1 illustrates the non-mosaic expression of introduced plasmids.
In Figure 1A and E, the expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP) under
the control of cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter is shown.
This contrasts to
the mosaic expression of this gene is plasmic-injected embryos (Fig.
1C).
The expression of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene under
the control of a neural-specific promoter (N-tubulin) is shown in Figure
1F and H (transgenic) and Figure 1G (plasmid-injected).
The transgenic embryo
shows expression in the neural tube, whereas the plasmid-injected embryo
shows sparse, mosaic expression.
A muscle-specific actin promoter was also used to drive expression of
GFP and CAT.
As shown in Figure 1J-L and N, appropriate expression in somites
and cardiac muscle is observed in transgenics, whereas mosaic expression
is seen in plasmid-injected embryos (Fig.
1M and O).
Figure 1.
Plasmid expression in transgenic
embryos from sperm nuclear transplantations compared to mosaic expression
of plasmids injected into embryos.
A: Trunk of transgenic embryo expressing pCMVnGFP.
B: DAPI staining of the region shown in A.
(DAPI stains DNA.)
C. Expression of GFP in trunk of embryo injected with pCMVnGFP.
D. DAPI staining of region shown in C.
E. Transgenic embryo expressing pCMVnGFP.
F. Transgenic embryo expressing the N-tubulin/CAT plasmid.
G. Expression of CAT in embryo injected with the N-tubulin/CAT plasmid.
H. Cross-section of transgenic embryo showing expression of the N-tubulin/CAT
plasmid in primary neurons.
I. Bright-field image of transgenic tadpole expressing pCARGFP.
J. Fluorescent image of tadpole shown in I. GFP expression can be seen in
somites and heart muscle.
K. Transgenic expression of pCARGFP in somites.
L. Transgenic expression of pCARGFP in heart.
M. Mosaic expression of pCARGFP in plasmid-injected embryo.
N. Transgenic expression of pRLCAR (CAT driven by muscle-specific actin
promoter).
O. Mosaic expression of pRLCAR in plasmid-injected embryo.
(Figure from Kroll and Amaya, 1996.
Reproduced with permission of The Company
of Biologists.)
Confirmation of integration of plasmids into the genome of transplantation-derived
embryos was obtained by probing Southern blots of DNA from one month-old
tadpoles with a GFP probe.
Typically, unintegrated plasmids would be lost
by this stage.
As shown in Figure 2, GFP sequences were found in transplantation-derived
tadpoles that expressed pCARGFP but were not found in their non-expressing
siblings.
Figure 2.
Tadpoles produced by sperm nuclear
transplantation contain integrated plasmid.
(A) Schematic of linearized
pCARGFP plasmid: cardiac actin promoter (open box), GFP sequences (gray
box), SV40 polyadenylation site (solid box) and bacterial sequences (thin
line).
Below, products expected after pCARGFP concatemerization in the embryo.
N,  Not I.
(B) Southern blot of genomic DNA from 1-month-old tadpoles
produced using pCARGFP nuclear transplantations (lanes 4-11).
Tadpoles expressing
GFP non-mosaically (+) and tadpoles not expressing GFP (-) are designated.
pCARGFP was detected in  Hin dIII (H)-digested genomic DNA using probe
sequences designated in A.
Lanes 1-3, pCARGFP plasmid was added to genomic
DNA from control tadpoles (not produced using nuclear transplantation) just
prior to  Hin d III digestion.
(Figure from Kroll and Amaya, 1996.
Reproduced with permission of The Company of Biologists.)
We have used the Kroll and Amaya technique to generate transgenic animals
in my own laboratory (Fig.
3).
Click  here  for
details about research in the Browder laboratory.
Figure 3.
Transgenic  Xenopus
laevis  tadpole expressing the Green Fluorescent Protein gene under control
of the cytomegalovirus promoter.
The tadpole was generated by Jill Johnston
in Leon Browder's laboratory using the technique of Kroll and Amaya.
A  recent
paper from Sylvia Evans' laboratory  describes a more direct approach
for generation of transgenics (Fu  et al.
, 1998).
These two techniques,
combined with the accessibility and ease of manipulation of  Xenopus  embryos,
should provide investigators with unprecedented opportunities to examine
the molecular basis of early development.
Digging Deeper
The  Xenopus  Molecular
Marker Resource
References
Fu, Y., Wang, Y. and Evans, S.M.
1998.
Viral sequences enable efficient
and tissue-specific expression of trangenes in  Xenopus .
Nature Biotechnology
16: 253-257.
Gurdon, J.B., Lane, C.D., Woodland, H.R.
and Marbaix, G. 1971.
Use of
frog eggs and oocytes for the study of messenger RNA and its translation
in living cells.
Nature 233: 177-182.
Kroll,
K.L.
and Amaya, E.  1996.
Transgenic  Xenopus  embryos from sperm
nuclear transplantations reveal FGF signaling requirements during gastrulation.
Development 122: 3173-3183.
Tutorial Exercise
Amphibian Tutorial
End Body   Begin Bottom Overall Navigation
Dynamic Development
at a Glance
Main Page Dynamic Development
End Bottom Overall Navigation   Page Footer
Dynamic Development is a Virtual Embryo learning resource
This material may be reproduced for educational purposes only provided
credit is given to the original source.
Leon Browder
&  Laurie Iten
(Ed.)
Dynamic Development
Last revised Wednesday, March 4, 1998
